female narrator:
The preservation of food
has been a practice
in every human society
since the dawn of time.
To survive in ancient times,
people had to harness nature
and quickly learn
how to preserve food.
In frozen climates,
meat was kept in the ice.
And in tropical climates,
food was dried in the sun.
Food by its very nature
begins to spoil
almost as soon
as it is harvested.
If it isn't consumed
or preserved,
it quickly becomes useless.
The preservation of foods
allowed mankind
to make roots
and create a society
by remaining in one location
and living off the foods
they harvested and preserved.
Each culture preserved
their local food sources
using the same basic methods
of food preservation
such as drying,
freezing,
fermenting,
pickling,
and curing.
But within cultures,
the preservation of food
isn't strictly for sustenance.
There are also cultural aspects.
All across the world,
there are many religious
and celebratory occasions
where the preservation of foods
now has a social
and customary meaning.
The approach is now taken
that we preserve food
because we want to
rather than because we have to.
Food processing and preservation
is a set of methods
and techniques used
to transform raw ingredients
into food
so that they may be safely
consumed by humans and animals.
This process takes
raw ingredients such as meats,
vegetables, and fruits
and converts them
into safe, edible,
and more palatable foodstuffs.
Without these methods,
it would be almost impossible
to sustain the needs
of many urban populations
due to the fact that by the time
the food is transported
to its destination,
it would have
already been spoiled.
If food processing
and preservation didn't exist,
the choices of food available
to families
would be dramatically decreased.
We would also be subjected
to only what is in season
at any given time of year.
There are many benefits
of processing and preservation,
including toxin removal,
pathogen elimination,
food safety,
the improvement of flavor,
and maintaining
food consistency.
Modern processing
and preservation
also improves
the quality of life
for people with allergies,
diabetics,
and other people
who cannot consume
common certain food elements.
But there are also a few
drawbacks to processed foods.
Food processing can lower
the nutritional value of foods,
as they tend
to contain additives,
such as flavorings and textures,
which have little or no
nutritional value.
And the preservatives
added during processing,
such as nitrites or sulphites,
may cause
adverse health effects.
But it is widely believed
that drawbacks such as these
are only minor when compared
to the potential risk
of contamination
of unprocessed foods by bacteria
such as salmonella and other
pathogenic microorganisms.
Almost every food that you eat
undergoes some form
of processing
before it is ready
to be consumed.
It can be as simple as washing
an apple before you eat it...
Through to processes
as complicated as prepping meat
and transporting it
to a local supermarket.
Simply combining foods
to create a recipe
is also considered
a form of food processing.
The most traditional
methods include
peeling or skinning,
chopping and slicing,
mincing,
liquidization,
emulsification,
mixing,
gas,
proofing,
spray drying,
pasteurization,
and cooking.
The peeling or skinning
of unwanted layers
on such fruits
as oranges or bananas
makes the edible part
of the fruit more accessible.
The chopping or slicing
of potato chips...
Diced carrots and onions
is a process that allows food
to be mixed, handed,
and easily ingested.
The liquidization of fruits
into juice
like apple juice,
orange juice,
or any type of fruit
or vegetable juice,
for that matter,
makes food
into a drinkable liquid.
Emulsification is the mixture
of two unblendable substances
such as oil and vinegar.
Naturally, these two substances
will separate from one another
and need to be shaken
before use.
Any time herbs and spices
are added to a food product,
it is also considered
to be food processing.
This form of food processing
is generally used
to make the food more flavorsome
and, by extension,
make it more enjoyable.
There are many foods
which require the use
of air entrapment or aeration
in order to be produced,
such as in the process
of making bread
or the gasification
of soft drinks.
Without this process,
products such as breads,
doughnuts, or biscuits
wouldn't exist.
Proofing is another step
in creating yeast breads
and baked goods where the yeast
is allowed to leaven the dough.
It is this step in which allows
dough to rise.
Spray drying
is a commonly used method
of drying a liquid
through hot gas.
This is common in powdered foods
and milk powders.
Pasteurized products,
such as eggs and milk,
all go through
a pasteurize process,
which involves heating
for the purpose of destroying
viruses and harmful organisms
such as bacteria, protozoa,
and molds.
This process isn't aimed
at killing the microorganisms
in the food.
Instead it reduces their numbers
so that they are unlikely
to cause disease.
Cooking via any type of heat
encompasses a vast range
of methods, tools,
and combinations
such as boiling,
broiling,
frying,
grilling,
or deep frying
are all very common types
of food processing,
and they generally,
although not always,
chemically transform it,
changing its flavor, texture,
and appearance.
As of the beginning
of the 20th century,
these different methods
of food processing
have become commonplace
in our society.
Food preservation
is a part of everyday life.
Almost every product
in a supermarket
or convenience store
has undergone some type
of preservation process.
Food preservation is the method
in which the treating
and handling of food
helps to slow down spoilage
and prevent food-borne illness
such as fungi, bacteria,
and other microorganisms
as well as inhibit
the natural aging process
of foods such as
fruits and vegetables.
There are many different methods
of food preservation
that range from being
rudimentary to quite advanced.
Drying is primarily used
to preserve meats and fruits.
It is one of the oldest forms
of preservation,
in which the water content
of the food is greatly reduced.
Smoking is a combination
of using heat
to dry foods
without cooking it.
It is commonly used
in fish and meats
and ensures that the flavor
is not lost during the process.
One of the most common
methods used
for commercial enterprises
such as supermarkets
is freezing.
By freezing foodstuffs
and products,
the shelf life of foods
such as vegetables and fruits
can be greatly extended,
and the nutritional loss
is minimal.
Vacuum packaging is generally
used for foods such as nuts.
By storing food
in a vacuum-like environment
such as an airtight bag
or bottle,
it eliminates the air needed
for the survival
of most bacteria
and other microorganisms.
Similar to the process
of drying,
salting draws the moisture
out of the meats
through the method of osmosis,
although this process
of food preservation
draws the nutrients
out of the meats.
Primarily, sugar is used
to preserve fruits
such as apricots, peaches,
plums, and apples.
This process is also used
to preserve certain types
of alcohol that contain fruits
such as brandy
or other fruit-based spirits.
Most pickling processes involve
the heating or boiling of foods
such as corned beef,
vegetables, and cabbage.
The foods are usually saturated
in a preserving liquid
such as vinegar, ethanol,
or vegetable oil,
which, when combined with heat,
kills any bacteria
that may form.
Many kinds
of fruits and vegetables
can be kept for many years
by storing them
in cans or bottles.
In the case of canning,
the foods are stored
in airtight containers
and then heated to a temperature
that destroys
any remaining microorganisms.
This is an extremely effective
way to transport foods
to underdeveloped
and remote parts of the world.
Irradiation is food processing
that involves
ionizing radiation.
This can be achieved
by either high-energy electrons
or a certain type of X-ray
and is sometimes referred to
as cold pasteurization,
where the food is not heated,
but it is not chilled either.
Salad type foods are generally
difficult to preserve.
But when placed
in an atmosphere
with a reduced
oxygen concentration
and sealed in bags,
their shelf life
is greatly extended
and the nutrients retained.
As you can see, there are many
different ways to preserve food.
All the techniques
which we have covered
are in use every day
all over the world.
The process of food preserving
and processing
at times can be
a complicated one.
When people purchase
a food product,
they expect it to be
of a certain safe quality
and standard.
With the various methods
of processing and preserving,
manufacturers must adhere to
many quality assurance policies
to ensure that through
the handling, preparation,
and storage of food
that food-borne illness
will not occur.
When at home,
the method of processing food
to avoid bacterial infection
can be a relatively easy task
but also a crucial one.
There are a few simple rules
you should always remember.
Always wash your hands
before handling food.
Wash all fruit and vegetables
with water,
especially if they are uncooked.
Keep all work surfaces,
cooking utensils,
and plates
clean and dry.
Also try not to prepare food
when you are sick
or just recovering
from an illness.
You could spread the illness
to other people,
or it could stunt
your own recovery.
But what do you do when buying
food that is preprepared?
How can you be sure that it's
been through all the processing
and preservation
safety precautions?
During the 1960s,
a system was put in place
by the National Aeronautic
and Space Administration
to prevent food safety hazards
for astronauts whilst in space.
The idea of an astronaut
becoming sick
whilst in zero gravity
was too catastrophic
to imagine for NASA,
so they implemented a strict
program of quality assurance
to ensure that it would
never be an issue.
That very same program
has been adopted
by food companies
around the world
to help control
the food production process.
This program is now known
as HACCP.
This stands for Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point.
Basically,
what the HACCP program means
is finding out
where the serious problems occur
in processing and preservation,
monitoring those steps
for problems,
and fixing any if they occur.
There are seven key steps
to the HACCP program.
Hazard analysis.
Hazards are factors that
the processes cannot control.
Usually these are elements
found in foods
before processing begins.
Producers, suppliers,
and transporters
use quality assurance
to eliminate and reduce
these hazards
before they take
any further steps.
Identify the critical
control points.
Common critical control points
are sanitation
and temperature control
used to eliminate
any further hazards.
Critical limits.
It is important
to set critical limits
for each critical control point.
These are usually
temperature-orientated.
A good example of this would be
if the chilling
or cooking temperature
goes under or over
the critical limit.
If it does, there could be
a serious problem.
Monitoring.
All the critical control points
need to be monitored
to see if all the targets
are being met.
And also, you can see instantly
if something goes wrong.
Establish corrective actions.
These are actions and procedures
set in place
in the event
that something goes wrong.
This ensures that the problem
can be quickly resolved.
Correct system operations.
Having a HACCP system
is imperative.
But what good is it
if you don't know
if it's working correctly?
The system needs to be
constantly tested
in order to know
that the results you are getting
are the results you want.
Set up records.
It is imperative
that accurate records be kept
in order
to regulate performance.
Precise records are also helpful
in the event of an audit.
The HACCP system
is constantly in evolution
as it changes with the needs
of customers
who are always expecting
higher standards
in food quality control.
It is a means of preventing
problems in the first place,
being proactive
about food safety
rather than reactive.
Let's look at an example
of the processes involved
with one food product:
milk.
We'll cover how it is harvested,
processed, and preserved
from the time
cows are on the farm
through to it being delivered
onto our supermarket shelves.
On the farm,
cows tend to spend their time
in eight-hour increments.
They eat for eight hours a day,
spend eight hours ruminating,
or chewing their cud,
and about eight hours sleeping.
In the morning,
after they are milked,
they are provided with a fresh
paddock of grass to graze
and another fresh paddock
in the evening.
Sometimes they are fed grain,
hay, or silage
but only if there is
not enough grass available.
Typically, cows are milked
twice a day,
normally around 6:00 a.m.
and then again around 5:00 p.m.
It takes around five minutes
to milk each cow,
depending on the type
of robotic dairy
that the farm is using
and the amount of milk
that the cow is producing.
Most robotic dairies
have the capability
to milk up to 40 cows
at any given time,
which reduces
the cows' waiting time.
These robotic dairies
have milking machines
which mimic the action
of young calves,
creating a pulsating vacuum
around the teat,
which in turn causes the milk
to be released from the udder.
The milk that is harvested
from the cows
is then stored in massive vats
or silos at 4 degrees Celsius
for no longer than 48 hours.
The milk is collected
from the farms
every 24 to 48 hours,
then transported
in stainless steel tankers
which are heavily insulated
to keep the milk
at a low temperature.
All of
the transportation drivers
are accredited milk graders
and constantly monitor
the quality and temperature
of the milk
before, during, and after
the transfer.
Samples are taken
and tested for protein,
bulk milk cell count,
and bacteria
before the milk enters
the factory processing area.
If the milk does not meet
a high standard,
it will be rejected.
Farmers are accountable
for the rejected milk,
and since they are paid
on the quality
and composition of their milk,
it is important
that these samples
are collected
and stored correctly.
Once the transported milk
has passed the testing process,
it is only then accepted
into the processing plant
and stored in other
temperature-controlled silos.
The next step
is the pasteurization process.
Pasteurization involves heating
every particle of the milk
to a specific temperature
for a precise amount of time
and then cooling it again
to prevent remaining bacteria
from growing to levels
that could cause premature
spoilage such as souring.
Its purpose is to ensure
that all milk products
are safe
for human consumption
by destroying
all the bacteria
that may be harmful
to our health.
The next step
is homogenization.
This involves the pushing
of raw milk through an atomizer,
which disperses the fat evenly
throughout the milk
and stops the fat from floating
to the top of the container.
A separate process
to pasteurization is called UHT,
or ultra-high temperature
process.
This creates a shelf-stable
product with a long life.
Both pasteurized and UHT milk
can then be cartoned
using aseptic packaging,
a method that transfers
a heat-processed liquid
into a package
without allowing contamination.
After all the stages
are complete,
the milk is then shipped off
to the stores,
ready for human consumption.
Today we have a wider variety
of food products available
than ever before.
And there are many, many ways
to process and preserve foods.
Some of them are very old
and date back
thousands of years.
And some of them are on
the cutting edge of technology,
an edge which is constantly
developing and evolving.